Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm, I'm your host Ricardo Lops, and today
I'm joined by Dr. Valerie Tiberius. She is a
professor in the department of philosophy at the University
of Minnesota. She works on the on well-being and
virtue from a philosophical and psychological perspective, and we're
going to focus mostly on her book What Do
You Want Out of Life, a philosophical Guide to
Figuring Out What Matters. So Doctor Tiberius, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thanks, thanks for having me.
So tell us first, what is well-being and how
do you approach it from a philosophical and also
a psychological perspective?
So, Philosophers have a lot of different theories about
what well-being is. Psychologists also have a lot of
different theories. Those theories tend to group into three
big types. One is hedonistic theories. That's where well-being
is just having more pleasure than pain. Then second,
there's a kind of objective theories where well-being is
getting some things that are objectively good independent of
you. And then the third group is the view
that well-being is what your well-being is, is determined
by your own psychological states like your goals or
your desires or your preferences, and that's my group.
Um, SO I defend a theory that's called the
value fulfillment theory. And it takes well-being to be
the fulfillment of your values over time. Uh, SO
it, there's pleasure is valuable, of course, on my
view, because people value pleasure and they value in
having enjoyable experiences, but there aren't any objective goods
that you have to get. What is good for
you depends on The things that you care about
and could will care about over time. Yeah,
and what is intrinsically good for people and is
what is intrinsically good for people something they want
or care about, or is it something different from
that?
So, I think what's intrinsically good for people is
to get the things that they care about or
as I would put it, the things that they
value. OK. Now, some people would say, as long
as you want it right now, then it's good
for you. My picture is a little more complicated
because I think if you say that what's intrinsically
good for you is what you want for its
own sake right in this moment. You end up
with some, um, some problems because sometimes the thing
that you want for its own sake right now
is something that's going to cause you a lot
of problems in the future. Uh, SO, I think
the thing that's good for you is the thing
that you value intrinsically. With a few conditions placed
on that. It has to be something that you
value in a holistic way. You, all of your
psychology is oriented towards that thing that you value.
Right, but I mean, does what is intrinsically good
for people include aversion towards certain things in life,
because there are, for example, what I think we
could call robust beds like pain, nausea, etc.
Yeah, that's a great question. So these kinds of
robust bad, these, these examples of things that seem
obviously intrinsically bad for people. Independently of what they
happen to care about. So you can imagine a
person who is a masochistic, who, you know, Thinks
they want to feel pain, but perhaps we still
want to be able to say that the pain
is bad for them, or you can imagine a
person who is um so depressed that uh uh
that they don't care if they're in pain or
they feel like they deserve it. We still want
to say the pain is bad for them. So,
those are the kinds of cases that cause the
most difficulty for me, for my, for a theory
like mine. Because it, a, a theory like mine,
which I think it they, it, it has a
lot of advantages, but there's a big disadvantage of
not having those objective good and bads that you
can point to and say, this is always bad
for you, no matter what you care about. Um,
SO the way I try to accommodate that, that,
that kind of intuition that you're pointing to, the
intuition that pain is just bad, no matter what,
um, is by talking about how Much Pain is
involved in the pursuit of what we value. So,
pain is a, it's a kind of signal that
something is going wrong, uh, on, on the, the
kind of uh psychological picture that I like, uh,
uh, pain is a kind of perception that you're
failing in getting the things that you care about.
Um, IT might be something so simple as you're
failing to protect your physical body, because you have
an injury and that causes pain. So, I think
there's a, it, it's a, a bit of a
convoluted explanation about the badness of pain, but I
still think on this value fulfillment theory or any
kind of theory that starts with our desires and
goals, you can make sense of why pain is
almost always bad for people intrinsically. It's just, it's
not as simple and and elegant a story. As
the hedonists who just get to say, look, pain
is just objectively bad.
So you touched a little bit on depressed people
there. So what if people have no goals or
desires at all, like when they are depressed, how
do you approach those kinds of people?
Yeah, so one thing about actual depressed people as
opposed to philosophical made up people, um, is even
if they have very few goals, positive goals, they
typically have aversions. They're averse to the painful state
that they're in and would rather be happier. They
would rather not be depressed, um, so. Value fulfillment
theory says that what's good for you is fulfilling
your values. Desires are an a a part, a
component of values, and aversions are a component of
what we might call disvalues. So, the theory would
say if fulfilling your values is good. Satisfying your
desires is. Part of that Avoiding what you disvalue
is good or. I suppose the other way of
putting it is, um, not getting what you're averse
to is good. Um, AND so, one thing we
can say about depressed people is that if they
are averse to their depression, which mostly they are,
um, it's good for them not to be depressed.
There are some cases and uh there's a nice
paper about this by um Anne Tully. Where you
might think the depressed person is in what he
calls complete cognitive collapse. So there's absolutely nothing there,
no aversion, no desire. I came to think talking
to psychologists that that kind of case is actually
extremely implausible because even if the person in that
state doesn't have goals that are In their conscious
mind, they do have kind of preprogrammed biological goals
and aversions that are subconscious, so they're Uh, and
if that's all they have, then that's what we
should pay attention to.
But how do we know that they have subconscious
desires or goals?
Yeah, that's, that's a great question. I mean, What
Psychologist, uh, my, one of my uh uh collaborators
is a psychologist who I talk to about these
topics a lot, and, and his basic answer is
it's, it's inference to the best, best explanation, um,
that you, you can't actually do an experiment to
put people in a state of complete cognitive collapse
and and, and manipulate the variable. To find out
what happens, but typically when people's depression alleviates their
goals come back and so that's some evidence that
the goals were there, um, you know, we, we
sometimes. LACK conscious awareness of our goals because we're
distracted, or we're asleep, or you're in a coma
for a month because you got hit by a
car, um, and after that period where the goals
are not in your, the focus of your conscious
attention, they do come back. So that's, I think
that's the best sort of evidence we have that
these goals are actually there in the brain. I
mean, one thing about our consciousness is. It's, if
you think of it as a flashlight, um, which
I'm sure is not the right way to think
about it from the point of view of consciousness
studies, but if you think of it as, you
know, we have All these different things going on
in our brain and the part that we are
actually consciousness of is like a light shining on
something that's in our focus. That light is tiny
compared to all the stuff that's happening in our
brains. So I don't, for that reason too, I
think it shouldn't be surprising to think a lot
of these goals and aversions that we have are,
they're in there, even if we're not thinking about
them right now. And so for the person, for
this seriously depressed person who seems to be in
complete cognitive collapse. Ultimately, I wanna say it, the
collapse isn't complete. They're, they don't have, it's not
actually the case that they have nothing whatsoever like
a rock. They're not the person is not a
rock.
Right, but since many times our values and goals
are in conflict with one another, how do we
weigh them and decide which ones we should prioritize?
That's one of the questions I'm most interested in
in that, especially in the book that you mentioned,
because, so. I think the values that we should
pay attention to when we're thinking about how to
improve our lives and how to live, they're pretty
big, you know, things like enjoyment and friendship, um,
meaningful work, uh, skill development, achievement, for, you know,
for some people, spiritual connection. So these things are
very broad. There's There are tons of ways of.
Fulfilling the value of friendship, the value of spiritual
connection. You could, I'm not a very spiritual person
myself, but you could go to the Catholic Church,
you could go to a Buddhist temple, you could
do your own thing. You could go to California
and practice yoga. I mean, there's so many different
things you can do to fulfill that value. So
that's one thing. And then the other thing is,
all of these things, if you want to fulfill
them, they take time and attention. And so just
as you say, there's going to be a conflict
because we are sadly limited creatures and we can't
do everything all the time. Um, SO I think
resolving those conflicts is a matter of Trying to
refine or interpret that big, huge general value that
could be pursued in multiple different ways. Try to
try to bring it down to earth, to translate
it into specific projects and goals in a way
that makes it compatible with the other things that
you care the most about. And that's just sort
of the messy process of living a life, and
I think there there aren't that many. Rules, um.
It's not, it's, it's, you know, I, I inclined
towards. Thinking that It along the lines of a
kind of particularism where it's the, the details and
the context matter so much in these decisions about
how to try to make our values fit together.
Yeah. That we can't give the kind of general
principles. Like if I told you, always put friendship
first, you know, even if you're up for tenure
and what you really need to do is publish
or you're going to lose your job. It doesn't
make sense, but putting friendship first could make it
make sense later in your life. So, these decisions
are extremely context sensitive, and they also are not
always the same for a person over time. Sorry,
that's a very complex answer, but I think it's,
it's just the complexity of life.
Yeah, right, so, but when it comes to the
goals that are worth pursuing in life, should they
be decided at an individual level?
Yes, that's a great question too. I think this
is what a lot of people don't like about
a theory like mine. Because I do think what's
intrinsically good for a person or what constitutes a
person's well-being. Is ultimately determined by the individual. So
the, the kind of. Black and white answer to
your question is, it's the, it's the individual who
decides. It's the individual who's the, the ultimate determinant
or the authority about what's good for him or
her. But it's also true that we are profoundly
social creatures, and so many of the things we
care about involve other people. Um, SO two of
the things that people value tremendously, if you ask
them, friends and family. Well, If you're going to
fulfill those values, you can't do it by ignoring
what other people think about you and how and
how good a job you're doing. Um, SO, you
know, for instance, you're just, if, if one of
your values is to have um Significant friendships and
to be a good friend. You just don't succeed
in that if your friends think you're a jerk.
Um, YOU, you have failed, and, and so you,
in, in figuring out how to fulfill the value
of friendship, you need to actually be responsive to
the other people in your life. So that doesn't
mean that other people determine what's good for you,
but they're in the sense that if you're a
person who actually just is a loner, and you
just don't want many friendships, I don't think the
fact that other people care about friendship impinges on
you and says, oh, you have to value friendship
because that's what other people value. That goes against
my theory. But I do think when you're figuring
out how to live your life because other people
are so important to, you know, To our capacity
to to get the things that matter to us,
we do have to pay attention to what other
people think.
But I mean when it comes to deciding among
them many possibilities open to us, should we consult
other people or should we make the decision by
ourselves?
So I think it often makes sense to consult
other people, you know, we're moving away from the
kind of philosophical question about what's the, what's the
foundation of the value because there I think it
is the individual. But if we're talking about being
the practical question, and we're like, how do you
do this? How do you figure out, how do
you manage these conflicts? How do you figure out
what goals to pursue? I think talking to other
people is extremely valuable, partly because I think we
are crappy at introspection. So, We, especially philosophers, tend
to think if you want to know about yourself,
you just sit there. And think, well, what's most
important to me? What do I like? What do
I care about? But I think we're actually not
very good at this, in part because of this
matter of conscious attention. There's so much going on
that we're not consciously. Focused on. And I think
often people, especially people who know us, can kind
of look at our behavior, you know, like as
if they were doing a scientific study of us,
like rats in a maze. They can sort of
watch us and think. She, she really feels happy
every time she comes back from her dance class,
you know, I've, I've, and a friend can, this
has happened to me, a friend can, can tell
you, you know what, you've been so anxious about
work lately, and the 11 I, one thing I
noticed about you is every time you do anything
like dancing or music or something like that, you
just come home all bubbly and happy. And that
can make you think, oh, maybe I should do
more of that. Maybe I should prioritize that in
my life a little bit more than I have
done. But sometimes we can't see that ourselves because
we're so wrapped up in the work stuff that
we're anxious about that we don't, uh, we just,
we can't shift our attention to the thing that's
actually bringing us some relief and some joy. I
don't know if you've had experiences like that. If
there's a there's interesting questions about female friendships versus
male friendships, and I don't, you know, I've talked
to my husband about whether he has these kinds
of experiences with his male friends, and he does,
but I think it's more common with women friends
that we're watching each other and, and, you know,
and saying like, I've noticed this about you. I
think you ought to, um.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, but if people make the
decision by themselves, if they decide to do that,
do you think that they should follow their gut
or be a little bit more reflective?
I'm for balance between gut and reflection, um, so
I think. Depending on the kind of person you
are, I think a lot of people, especially academics
and people who would likely be listening to a
podcast like yours, um, We tend to put too
much emphasis on reflection, so we think we're so
smart that we can think through the best choice.
And I think that sometimes results in ignoring the
evidence from your body. Uh, SO this example about,
you know, a friend telling me that every time
you go to a dance class, you, you, you're,
you're all happy for a few minutes. Uh, THAT'S,
that's something you don't have to have a friend
tell you that. You could observe that about yourself
if you notice, suddenly I feel lighter, and, and
I'm, I'm all of a sudden bubbly, and it
feels like a weight has lifted from my shoulder.
Um, THAT'S That's what I think it means to
say you're uh listening to your gut, you know,
you're, it's not literally your gut, it's being in
tune with your, the emotional side of yourself and
your physical responses to um what's happening in your
life. So, I think We should listen to our
gut more, especially if we're the kind of person
who is overly reflective. But I don't think just
the gut, because sometimes your gut. Sometimes your emotions
lead you in stupid directions. I mean, I think
for some people, if you just went with your
Strongest emotion and, you know, you're very in touch
with your physical experience, but you never think about
the future. Um, YOU could end up doing some
things that have negative consequences in, in a few
years. So we do have to be somewhat reflective
to think about. Tradeoffs and how much um. Sacrificing
some current joy might have future benefits and those
kinds of long term goals are often quite important
to us and I think it's, it's hard to,
uh, pursue long term commitments without some reflection. Mhm.
But I mean, what is since you're, you're talking
about long term commitments when it comes to our
values, I mean, should they be more short term
or long term oriented, or is that for each
person to decide?
Yeah, I think that so when I talked about
these, these kind of very general broad values like
friendship, family, spiritual connection, work, meaningful work, I don't
actually think those values change much at that general
level of description. So they're very long term. I
think most people who value friendship value friendship for
their entire lives. Um But what, so what changes
is the specific goals that fulfill that value. And
there I think you're. There is individual variation. I
think some people are, are more content with greater
change, um, where, you know, They I mean, maybe
have multiple spouses, one after the other, or different
friends, and they have a friendship and it wanes,
and then they have other friendships. And then for
some people, having one spouse for your entire life
is the most important thing to their happiness. So,
I do think when it comes to the specific
goals that rep that that um follow or that
help you pursue the value. How much stability you
should have is. To a large extent up to
the person.
Right, so I wanted to ask you about a
concept I read about in your book. What is
reflective wisdom and how does it apply in the
context of what we are talking about here?
So I, I was, I sort of coined that
reflective wisdom phrase because I wanted to talk about
the kind of wisdom people have. Who are good
at making choices for themselves. So, people who are
good at living their own lives well. And I
wanted to distinguish it from how we typically think
of wisdom as a a moral virtue, where wisdom
is the virtue that helps you sort out all
the different moral considerations. Um, SO, We've actually already
talked about quite a few of the features of
reflective wisdom. I think for a person who has
reflective wisdom has some self-awareness, so they're, uh, they
have some just self-knowledge about the kinds of things
that they like and how they respond to, to
the the world. Um, BUT also some awareness of
their emotional states and their physical responses to the
world. And then importantly, I think a person with
reflective wisdom has a kind of flexibility. That allows
them to sometimes be reflective and sometimes listen to
their gut. Um, SO, I, I wanted to get
away from a picture of wisdom where it's very
cognitive and it's just intellectual, and the wise person
is just a really good thinker, uh, because I
think wisdom, the kind of wisdom that helps you
live your life, is, uh, Knowing when to think
more, but also knowing when to stop thinking and
just experience things. So that's The way it fits,
yeah, I guess that's the explanation for how it
fits with what we're currently talking about is I
think reflective wisdom would be the virtue that enables
people to figure out how to fulfill their values
and how to put their values together over time.
Right, OK, so we've been talking about values, goals,
desires that people have, and how they can approach
them, how they decide among them which ones to
prioritize, and so on, but
what
is a good
life? So, I don't have, um, I haven't written
about a good life. I think, I mean, so
I don't have a, a view to defend, but
I'm inclined to think when we talk about a
good life, we don't just meet in a life
that's going well for you. We mean a life
that's also morally upright, morally respectable. So I'm inclined
to think a good life is A life that
has well-being, so it has things that are intrinsically
good for the person, but it also lives up
to a moral standard. And I don't know what
that moral standard is. You'd have to, you have
to have a moral theory to determine the standard.
But, but I would say, you know, at least,
You, you have to be uh. Uh, NOT, not
the, not the kind of person who violates a
bunch of moral rules and laws and to have
a modicum of virtues like kindness and fairness. Um,
YEAH, so one thing I've, I've wondered is if
To me, it seems like the good life. That's
the biggest category. It includes everything. And I've just
said it certainly includes well-being and moral virtue, but
maybe it also includes some kind of aesthetic appreciation.
So my, my friend, uh, the happiness philosopher Dan
Hayron, he thinks a good life has to include
some capacity to appreciate the beauty of nature, um.
And maybe the beauty of art. That's, I don't
know, I'm not sure what to think about that,
but I'm open to thinking that a good life
also includes some, uh, aesthetic awareness, you know, like
a person who would burn the Mona Mona Lisa,
is that person, they have a good life. Feels
like they're missing something, that's not, they're not the
best, they're not doing the best in life. But
I, I'm, I'm, that's something I'm not. I, I
don't know. I don't have a horse in the
race.
But if the good life includes being moral, what
is it to be moral? I mean, how do
we determine that? Of course, I think you mentioned
at a certain point there that it depends on
the moral or ethical theory we adopt, but just
in more general terms, what is it to be
moral?
Well, that's kind of a million dollar question. I
and I don't, I don't, I don't. I don't
defend and I haven't written about that question. I'm
inclined towards a kind of contractualist approach and thinking
that um the. Morals. Rules that we should follow
are the rules that People, reasonable people thinking. In
terms of what. Set of principles that makes sense
to live by in a community with other reasonable
people, whatever that set of rules is, that's what
determines the moral, but Um So I'm not, I'm
not really inclined towards the utilitarian perspective for various
reasons, um, but. You know, people obviously disagree here.
I don't, that's not something I've really spent much
time, uh, I, I haven't published anything about morality
per se. Mhm.
So going back to the topic of well-being specifically,
does it tie to virtue in any way and
what is virtue in this context?
So, I absolutely think it does. Um, YOU know,
Hume thought, Hume, David Hume defined virtue as the
traits of character that are useful or agreeable to
the self or others. Very broad conception of virtue,
which I like, um, and I think There are
plenty of virtues that are useful for us in
pursuing our own values. Um, SO we talked a
bit about the reflective wisdom, having a kind of,
uh, mental flexibility that allows you to be reflective
sometimes and also to listen to your gut. If
that's a virtue, I think it's obviously relevant to
well-being. Because people have so many values that are
social, that involve other people, I think lots of
virtues like kindness, compassion, um, generosity, those sorts of
virtues are good for pursuing the value of friendship,
the value of relationships with family. Um, I would
bet, although this isn't my particular expertise, but they're
probably virtues that help people pursue their spiritual values
if they have religious or spiritual values, um, any
kind of values that have to do with long
term projects. Like, um, values that have to do
with work. Those will benefit from the virtues of
courage and perseverance, temperance, um, focus. So, so I
think, you know, it's gonna be uh If, if
you have a picture of the virtues like David
Hume had where there's tons of virtues because it's
anything that's useful or agreeable to you or to
other people, um, so it'll be a pretty complicated
picture to, to. Define every single virtue that could
possibly be related to well-being, but I think there's
going to be tons of connections.
Right, so I have one last topic I would
like to ask you about, and I have 2
or 3 questions about it. So we've been talking
about well-being, but what about happiness? Should we aim
at being happy?
Um, So, One thing, one problem in this, the
philosophical well-being literature is that. These, these words get
used in different ways by different people. And there
are quite a few people who just use happiness
to mean well-being, so there's no distinction. I'm thinking,
the way I think about happiness is it's a
psychological feeling, and that's maybe how you're thinking about
it. Um, SO, I really like, again, uh, my
friend, uh, Dan Haburn has a theory of happiness
as a kind of emotional state. Um, It's Enjoyment,
um, engagement, attunement, and endorsement, uh, and a person
who's stably disposed to regard their life in, in
this way, um, with these kinds of emotional states,
that's what happiness is. I like this theory. It's,
it's, I think it, um, it fits. It, it
really captures a lot of uh happiness in a
broad sense. So happiness isn't just excitement, but also
it includes kind of like stoic calm or tranquility.
So why should we go for that? Um, WELL,
first. I just think most of us do. We
do, we just like being in pleasant states of
consciousness and If you think about how we evolved
to pursue our goals. You could think of happy
states of consciousness as a kind of reward for
getting what we want. Um, SO, I think we're
almost hardwired to like our own happiness. Uh, GOOD
states feel good. I mean, it's, it's kind of
as simple as that. But it's also true. So
this is one thing you find from the psychological
research because they study happiness in the sense of
these emotional states. The state of feeling satisfied with
your life or other kinds of positive affective states.
And there's quite a bit of evidence that those
happy states of consciousness. Or at least there's great
evidence that they're highly correlated with lots of other
good things, like stable relationships, success in your job,
health outcomes, and there's some evidence that there might
be a causal relationship, so that if happier people
being happy actually causes you to do better at
these things. So, it's not just that if you
have friends, you'll be happy, but also if you're
happy, uh, you'll have better friendships. So I think.
We want to be happy just intrinsically because of
how we're wired, um, but there's also lots of
instrumental reasons to care about happiness because it's good
for us in so many other ways. Uh, IF
you're, you know, a happier person, you will actually
live a longer and healthier life with more good
things in it. Uh, SO I think happiness is
really important. It sometimes has made me think, That
My, my value fulfillment theory should have a, a
special place for happiness, but I haven't taken that
step. It, it seems. I don't think it's, it,
it seems to make the theory kind of awkward
and complicated in a way that's not necessary, given
that happiness just is important to our values.
But I mean, if even if we value happiness,
should we have it as a goal? Should we
seek happiness, or is it just, or should it
also, should it just be a byproduct of aiming
at other things like virtue, morality, and so on?
Yeah, that's a great question. I mean, I think,
so you might, you probably remember from uh The
history of philosophy, the paradox of hedonism, that if
you aim at pleasure, you won't get it. Um,
THAT in order to get pleasure, you have to
aim at something else and get the pleasure as
a byproduct. So, I think there's something to that.
I think aiming. Directly at positive states of consciousness
is not the way to get them. You know,
Back to dancing for a second. I do go
to dance classes, and I'm not, I don't go
there to be happy, although I know it makes
me happy, but I go there to dance and
to learn the steps and, you know, improve my
dancing skills, uh, but then I get the happiness.
Um, AND I think that's probably psychologically the way
it's gonna work for most people. But if you're
depressed, and you're or you're very anxious about something,
and you're in a period of your life where
you've noticed or someone has told you that you're
really unhappy and you need to do something about
it, then I think it could make sense to
have it as a goal. It's just that you
might It might be this kind of thing where
you have to, you have to say. OK, this
is my goal, cause I'm really unhappy right now
and I need more happiness in my life. I
know that if I just aim at it directly,
I can't get it. So I'm going to force
myself to do some other things in the hope
that it will produce happiness. So that's a way
in which it is your goal, but you have
to kind of mentally trick yourself into um some
indirection. I don't know what you would do if
you just wanted to be happy. I mean, aside
from taking drugs or something, that happiness drugs.
Yeah, so I have one last question then, does
happiness play a role in morality?
Yes, so Even though I said I'm not a
utilitarian, but I still think it's really important to
help other people be happier, or other creatures. Uh,
SO, Even if you don't think that the entire
point of morality is to increase the, the aggregate
happiness in the world. No one would deny that
happiness, well, some philosophers would deny it, but, but
most, most people think happiness is a good thing,
it's good if there's more of it, it's a,
it's a morally good thing to Help, uh, other
people acquire it. Um, SO, you know, I don't
eat meat, why not? That's because of the the
suffering and unhappiness of the animals who are in
the meat industry. Uh, SO there's a way in
which happiness is the happiness of animals is obviously
morally relevant. I think Happiness figures into the description
of quite a few moral virtues. Uh, SO being
compassionate to other people or being kind, it's hard
to be kind or compassionate without. Taking into account
the happiness of the. Beneficiary of your compassion or
kindness. Um, BUT I think they're, when it, especially
when it comes to people rather than farm animals,
it's important to think about well-being and not just
happiness, because I think if you want to help
another person, helping them get what they care about,
it is. Actually a better way to help them
than to just help them feel happier.
Yeah, OK, so, uh, the book is again What
Do You Want Out of Life, a philosophical guide
to figuring out what Matters, and I'm leaving a
link to it in the description of the interview
and Doctor Tiberius, just apart from the book, would
you like to tell people where they can find
your work on the internet?
Uh, MY website, Valerie Tiberius.com has a, has, um,
lists and links.
OK, great. I will add that to the description
of the interview and thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a pleasure to talk with you.
You're welcome. The pleasure was mine.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Puntervan Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterry, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.